---
layout: post
title: "Barclays FA WSL 2019-20:
Chelsea FCW Analysis"
author: "Molly McCann"
---

## _Calm Under Pressure: Analysis of Player Tendencies Under Opponent Pressure & Its Relation to Goal Scoring_

## Introduction

The 2019-20 Women’s Super League season was atypical due to the COVID-19 pandemic cutting the season short, completing only 17 out of 22 match days. Although Chelsea FC Women had one less point (39) than Manchester City Women (40) in the league table at the time of season cancellation, Chelsea was crowned champions due to an FA board decision. It was decided that the outcome of the season would be decided under a points-per-game system. In other words, Chelsea’s title relied on their ability to win matches, as the league awards a team three points for a win and 1 point for a draw. Because of this, the following analysis will focus on Chelsea’s success in goal scoring when attacking and the tactical play when under opponent pressure. 

In order to further understand how Chelsea was able to achieve a large number of points in the table having played one fewer game than Manchester City, it is important to look into several key contributing factors. The analysis will first examine Chelsea's ability to maintain composure and execute plays under opponent pressure, specifically focusing on their tendencies to either pass or carry the ball in pressured situations. By categorizing players by position (defenders, midfielders, and forwards), the analysis will assess how each group contributes to ball progression and the creation of goal-scoring opportunities.The examination of Chelsea’s tactical approach aims to uncover the relationship between their play under pressure and goal-scoring success, ultimately providing insights into how Chelsea maintained such a dominant performance during the season.

## Related Work

Player actions under pressure has been an area of interest in soccer since the introduction of analytics to the game. One study found in Football Observatory looked at the most instances of high-intensity pressure per match and compared the successful passes, dribbles, and their lengths. Unlike much of the previous work, the following analysis will create Gini inequality indices for position groups for passing and carrying the ball when under pressure and not under pressure. The Gini index is a measure of inequality within a distribution, derived from the Lorenz curve, often used in economics to understand and weigh wealth inequality. The index is on a scale of 0 to 1, with 0 representing perfect equality and 1 represents perfect inequality. Similar to the information found on the website, Medium, the different Gini values for each position group should be interpreted differently based on the needs and demands of each position. Additionally, this information will be combined with player specific Gini values, plots of passes into the box, and expected goals. Expected goals (xG) is one of the most popular metrics known among soccer fans and pundits that measures the quality of a shot by “calculating the likelihood that it will be scored by using information on similar shots in the past” (Whitmore). Expected goals is still a prevalent statistic in analysts’ repertoire and is commonly incorporated into player and team stat pages.

## Methods



## Discussion 

## Conclusion

## Bibliography 
